He sunne hath twise brought furth his tender grene,Twise clad the earth in liuely lustinesse:Ones haue the windes the trees despoiled clene, +And ones again begins their cruelnesse,Sins I haue hid vnder my brest the harm,That neuer shal recouer healthfulnesse.The winters hurt recouers with the warm:The parched grene restored is with shade.What warmth (alas) may serue for to disarmThe frosen hart, that mine in flame hath made? +What cold againe is able to restoreMy fresh grene yeres, that wither thus and fade?Alas, I see nothing hath hurt so sore,But time in time reduceth a returne:In time my harm encreaseth more and more,And semes to haue my cure alwaies in scorne.Strange kindes of death, in life that I do trie:At hand to melt, farre of in flame to burne. +And like as time list to my cure apply,So doth eche place my comfort cleane refuse.Al thing aliue, that seeth the heauens with eye,With cloke of night may couer, and excuseIt self from trauail of the daies vnrest,Saue I, alas, against all others vse,That then stirre vp the tormentes of my brest,And curse eche sterre as causer of my fate:And when the sunne hath eke the dark opprest,And brought the day, it doth nothing abateThe trauailes of mine endlesse smart and pain.For then as one that hath the light in hate, +I wish for night, more couertly to plain,And me withdraw from euery haunted place,Lest by my chere my chaunce appere to plain:And in my minde I measure pace by pace, To seke the place where I my self had lost,That day that I was tangled in the lace,In semyng slack that knitteth euer most: +But neuer yet the trauaile of my thoughtOf better state coulde catch a cause to bost.For if I found sometime, that I haue sought,Those sterres by whom I trusted of the port:My sailes do fall, and I aduance right nought,As ankerd fast: my sprites do all resortTo stand agazed, and sink in more and more +The deadly harme which she doth take in sport.Lo, if I seke, how I do finde my sore:And if I flee, I cary with me stillThe venomd shaft, which doth his force restoreBy haste of flight + and I may plaine my fillUnto my self, vnlesse this carefull songPrint in your hart some parcell of my tene. +For I, alas, in silence all to long,Of mine old hurt yet fele the wound but grene.Rue on my life: or els your cruel wrongShall well appere, and by my death be sene.THe soote + season, that bud and blome forth brings,With grene hath clad the hill, and eke the vale:The nightingale, with fethers new she sings:The turtle to her make hath tolde her tale:Somer is come, for euery spray now springs,The hart hath hong his old hed on the pale:The buck in brake his winter coate he flings:The fishes flete with new repayred scale:The adder all her slough away she slings:The swift swallow pursueth the flies smalle:The busy bee her hony now she minges:Winter is worne that was the flowers bale:And thus I see among these pleasant things,Eche care decayes, and yet my sorow springs.WHen youth had led me half the race,That Cupides scourge had made me runne:I loked backe, to mete the place,From whence my wery course begonne.And then I saw how my desire,Misguidyng me, had led the way:Mine eyen, to gredy of their hyre,Had made me lose a better pray.For when in sighes I spent the dayAnd could not cloke my grief with game:The boylyng smoke did still bewrayThe persant heat of secrete flame.And when salt teares do bain my brest,where loue his pleasant traines hath sowen:Her beauty hath the frutes opprest,Ere that the buds were sprong and blowne.And when mine eyen did styll pursueThe fliyng chace of their requestTheir gredy lokes did oft renewThe hidden wound within my brest.When euery loke these chekes might staine,From deadly pale to glowyng red:By outward signes appeared plaine,To her for help my hart was fled.But all to late loue learneth me,To paint all kinde of colors new:To blinde their eyes that els should seeMy specled chekes with Cupides hewe.And now the couert brest I claime,That worshipt Cupide secretely,And nourished his sacred flame:From whence no blasyng sparkes do flye.SUch waiward waies hath loue, that most part in discordOur willes do stand: whereby our harts but seldom do accord.Deceit in his delight, and to begile, and mockThe simple hartes, whom he doth strike with froward diuers stroke.He causeth thone to rage with golden burning dart,And doth alay with leaden cold again the other hart. +Whote glemes of burning fire, and easy sparkes of flameIn balaunce of vnegal weight he pondereth by aime.From easy ford, where I might wade and passe ful wel,He me withdrawes, and doth me driue into a depe dark hel,And me withholdes, wher I am cald, and offred place:And willes me that my mortall foe I doe beseke of grace.He lettes me to pursue a conquest welnere wonne,To folow where my paines were lost, ere that my sute begonne.So by this meanes I know how soone a hart may turne,From warre to peace, from truce to strife, and so againe returne.I know how to content my self in others lust:Of litle stuffe vnto my self to weaue a web of trust:And how to hide my harmes with soft dissembling chere,When in my face the painted thoughtes would outwardly apere.I know how that the blood forsakes the face for dred:And how by shame it staines again the chekes with flaming red.I know vnder the grene the serpent how he lurkes. +The hammer of the restles forge I wote eke how it workes.I know and can by roate the tale that I would tel:But oft the words come furth awrie of him that loueth wel.I know in heat and cold the louer how he shakes:In singing how he doth complain, in sleping how he wakes:To languish without ache, sicklesse for to consume:A thousand things for to deuise, resoluing all in fume.And though he list to see his ladies grace full sore.Such pleasures, as delight his eye, do not his health restore.I know to seke the track of my desired foe:And fear to finde that I do seke. But chiefly this I know,That louers must transforme into the thing beloued,And liue (alas who would beleue?) with sprite from life remoued.I know in harty sighes, and laughters of the splene,At ones to change my state, my will, and eke my color clene.I know how to deceaue my self with others help:And how the Lion chastised is by beating of the whelp. +In standing nere my fire, I know how that I freze:Far of I burne: in both I wast: and so my life I leze.I know how loue doth rage vpon a yelding minde:How smal a net may take and meash a hart of gentle kinde:Or els with seldom swete to season heapes of gall: +Reuiued with a glimse of grace old sorowes to let fal,The hidden traines I know and secret snares of loue:How soone a loke wil print a thought, that neuer may remoue.The slipper state I know, the sodein turnes from wealth,The doubtful hope, the certain woe, and sure despeire of health.WHen sommer toke in hand the winter to assail,With force of might, & vertue gret, his stormy blasts to quail,And when he clothed faire the earth about with grene,And euery tree new garmented, that pleasure was to sene:Mine hart gan new reuiue, and changed blood did sturMe to withdrawe my winter woes, that kept within the dore.A brode, quod my desire: assay to set thy fote,Where thou shalt finde the sauour swete: for sprong is euery rote.And to thy health, if thou were sick in any case,Nothing more good, than in the spring the aire to fele a space.There shalt thou heare and se all kindes of birdes ywrought,Well tune their voice with warble smal, as nature hath them tought.Thus pricked me my lust the sluggish house to leaue:And for my health I thought it best such counsail to receaue.So on a morow furth, vnwist of any wight.I went to proue how weil it would my heauy burden light.And when I felt the aire so pleasant round about,Lord, to my self how glad I was that I had gotten out.There might I se how Ver had euery blossom hent:And eke the new betrothed birdes ycoupled how they went. +And in their songes me thought they thanked nature much,That by her licence all that yere to loue their happe was such,Right as they could deuise to chose them feres throughout:With much reioysing to their Lord thus flew they al about.Which when I gan to resolue, and in my head conceaue,What pleasant life, what heapes of ioy these litle birdes receaue.And saw in what estate I wery man was brought,By want of that they had at will, and I reiect at nought:Lord how I gan in wrath vnwisely me demeane.I cursed loue and him defied: I thought to turne the streame,But when I well beheld he had me vnder awe,I asked mercy for my fault, that so transgrest his lawe.Thou blinded God, + (quod I) forgeue me this offence,Unwittingly I went about, to malice thy pretence.Wherwith he gaue a beck, and thus me thought he swore,Thy sorowe ought suffice to purge thy fault, if it were more.The vertue of which sound mine hart did so reuiue,That I, me thought, was made as whole as any man aliue,But here I may perceiue mine errour all and some,For that I thought that so it was: yet was it still vndone.And all that was no more but mine expressed minde,That faine would haue some good reliefe, of Cupide well assindeI turned home forthwith, and might perceue it well,That he agreued was right sore with me for my rebell.My harmes haue euer since, encreased more and more,And I remaine without his help, vndone for euermore,A mirror let me be vnto ye louers all:Striue not with loue, for if ye do, it will ye thus befall.LOue, that liueth, and raigneth in my thought,That built his seat within my captiue brest,Clad in the armes, wherin with me he fought,Oft in my face he doth his banner rest.She. that me taught to loue, and suffer payne,My doutfull hope, and eke my hot desire,with shamefast cloke to shadow and restraine,Her smiling grace conuerteth straight to yre.And coward loue then to the hart apaceTaketh his flight, wheras he lurkes and plainesHis purpose lost, and dare not shew his face.For my lordes gilt thus faultlesse bide I paines,Yet from my lorde shall not my footeremoue.Swete is his death, that takes his end by loue. IN Ciprus, springes (where as dame Uenus dwelt) +I Well so hotte is, that who tastes the same.Were he of stone, as thawed yse should melt,And kindeled finde his brest with fired flame.Whose moist poyson dissolued hath my hart.With crepyng fire my colde lymsar supprest,Feeleth the hart that harborde freedome smart,Endlesse dispaire long thraldome hath imprest.An other well of frosen yse is founde,Whose chilling venome of repugnant kindeThe feruent heat doth quenche of Cupides wounde:And with the spot of change infectes the minde:Whereof my dere hath tasted, to my paine.Wherby my seruice growes into disdaine.FRom Tuskane came my Ladies worthy race: +Faire Florence was sometime her auncient seate:The Western yle, whose pleasant shore doth faceWilde Cambers clifs, furst gaue her liuely heate:Fostred she was with milke of Irishe brest:Her sire, an Earle: her dame, of princes blood. +From tender yeres, in Britain did she rest,With a kinges child, who tasteth ghostly food. +Honsdon did first present her to mine iyen: +Bright is her hewe, and Geraldine she hight.Hampton me taught to wishe her first for mine: +And Windsor, alas, doth chase me from her sight. +Her beauty of kinde, her vertues from aboue.Happy is he, that can obtaine her loue. BRittle beautie, that nature made so fraile,Wherof the gift is small, and short the season,Flowring to day, to morowe apt to faile,Tickell treasure abhorred of reason, +Daugerous to dele with, vaine, of none auaile,Costly in keping, past not worthe two peason,Slipper in sliding as is an eles taile,Hard to attaine, once gotten not geason,Iewel of ieopardie that perill doth assaile,False and vntrue, enticed oft to treason,Enmy to youth: that most may I bewaile.Ah bitter swete infecting as the poyson:Thou farest as frute that with the frost is taken,To day redy ripe, to morowe all to shaken.ALas so all things now do hold their peace.Heauen and earth disturbed in nothing:The beasts, the ayre, the birdes their song do cease:The nightes chare the starres about doth bring:Calme is the Sea, the waues worke lesse and lesse:So am not I, whom loue alas doth wring,Bringing before my face the great encreaseOf my desires, whereat I wepe and sing,In ioy and wo, as in a doutfull ease.For my swete thoughtes sometime do pleasure bring:But by and by the cause of my diseaseGeues me a pang, that inwardly doth sting.When that I thinke what griefe it is againe,To liue and lacke the thing should ridde my paine.WHen Windsor walles susteyned my wearied arme,My hand my chin, to ease my restles hed: +Set pleasant plots reuested green with warme,The blossomd bowes with lusty Uer yspred,